So this is Fiona Liddell, one of the volunteers with Friends of Cardiff Reservoirs and I'm
talking to Annie Smith and we are at the Lisvane and Stanisian Reservoirs. So Annie, thank
you for agreeing to take part in this project.
My pleasure.
So can you tell me when you were employed with Welsh Water, perhaps go back to 2020,
what was your role?
I'm Annie Smith and my role with Lisvane and Stanisian was when I first started working
for Welsh Water as the Enroll Partnership Manager, which is the Enabling Natural Resources
and Wellbeing Partnership Manager. I saw the job advertised, which had an element of all
of the ecological side of protecting the site and also engaging with the community and
working with the community. It was quite a unique job description that you don't really
see come up every day and it caught my eye. I remember showing it to one of the lecturers
at the university and saying, what do you think about this job description? And he said,
that's written for somebody, nobody's got all of that. And I said, well, I have. I have,
I've got all the community side of things and the communication side of things, but
also background in environmental law management. So we won't apply for them. But don't be
surprised if it's written for somebody. Anyway, so I went for a job interview in August or
September in 2019. I was interviewed by Richard Cowie, who was chair of the Reservoir Action
Group, Nicola from Cardiff Council and Vicki Martin, who was the Head of Visitor Attractions
at Rush Water. And anyway, I got the job. And that's how I came to work for Rush Water
on a two-year contract to deliver the NREL grant, which is Rush Government Funded Grant,
to do what it says on the tin, enable natural resources and help you. You don't have to
prompt me now. What was the question?
If your role was an engagement officer, what did that mean? Who did you engage with and
for what purpose?
So Rush Water took over the site in 2016 after the campaign to save it had come to fruition.
And they were very keen to make sure that they kept the community involved in that journey
and any future plans that were taking place. So the intention was, it was proposed by the
Reservoir Action Group to set up a Friends of Group, the community wanted to set up Friends
of Group. And through the NREL grant, there was an opportunity to take that element of
the community engagement forward really. And it was a really good vehicle to kind of get
the community engaged with the future plans of the site and what we're going to do with
the future plans of the site.
So my role as partnership manager was to work with the community, work with both our Action
Group, work with the cloud of council, help set up the systems for a Friends of Group
and put into place certain elements that would enable the public to be able to come back
on site whilst protecting the ecology. So it's kind of that balancing act of getting that
message out to the community that we do want to open it up to the community, we do want
to open it up to the public, but we will only be able to do so if we do it in a way that
also protects the environment. Working with our regulators, Natural Resources Wales, working
colleagues such as Dam Safety to make sure that everything we were doing was safe and
in line with policies and regulations, while also being able to let the community have
an input and how they want to be able to use this site and save the site for future generations.
Can you tell us what was Welsh Water's vision really for the way this place looks and feels
and is used?
So Welsh Water already had existing visitor attraction sites. They had four open. They
got Llandegfair, Llysfron, went up in North Wales, Brenneg and went right in the middle
of Wyadah, Ellan Valley. So I think they already had sort of like an idea in their head that
they would like to develop this into a visitor attraction site. That helps enable people
to access the water for safer recreation use as well because obviously reservoirs are
quite dangerous if they're not in that safe environment. But they also needed to do it
in a way that engaged the local community. So I think out of all of the different sites,
this was the trickiest one because it's the only one that is in the middle of a city.
The immediate population surrounding it is about 30,000 people, whereas all of our other
sites people have to drive to that in quite rural locations. So I think it was constantly
that sort of like balancing act, but they knew that vision of bringing people in touch
with the outdoors, the water, the green infrastructure. That was always one of their main visions.
And the overall vision of the visitor attraction sites is to support the wellbeing.
Thank you. So can you describe for us what was the work that was undertaken in order
to develop what we see here today? So to create the Friends of group, Washed Water
hadn't done that before. So as you can imagine, Washed Water undertake lots of capital infrastructure
projects, a lot of it quite dangerous. We use a lot of contractors. So to use volunteers
on our lands delivering projects was a new concept to them. So that was one of my first
kind of, I suppose, tasks really to have a look at how we can make that happen, how we
can understand, how we can work with community as volunteers on our land and to take in some
of our projects. So in the background, I had to put together policies to make that happen,
work with Reservoir Action Group to understand how they wanted Friends of group formed. Reservoir
Action Group, rightly so, had a campaign, it was a campaign group, it was to save the
reservoir, whereas the Friends of group was to work in partnership with Washed Water.
So we took that bill to work in partnership element of it. They wanted to be independent
of Washed Water, but to work with us. And that's kind of as the basis of forming the
policy, working with directors of health and safety, legal, just to make that happen. So
it was really the trigger of how Washed Water did that. And now the volunteering manager
has got that system set up across our sites across the whole of Wales. So it really was
not just what helped happen here on this site, but what's happening across Wales.
So that was one element. Once we got that set up, we were able then to actually do some
volunteering work in between a pandemic, which was a bit tricky. It was a bit stop and start.
But once we were able to get people out on the site, get people into woodlands, get people
on site, that was brilliant. The NREL grant also helped fund the pathways that we see,
which means that people were able to walk around the site, which is protected as a SSSI
for the grass and fungi. So again, adding to that wellbeing element. They also funded
things like the bird hides, a few activities, some equipment for the Friends of group. And
also one thing that was kind of a bit of a spur of the moment, but worked out really well is
creating the dry stone walls as well. I really enjoyed doing that project. The pilot one was
just the Dry Stone Wall Association, myself and the late chair of the Friends of group,
who came out on a very miserable December day and built the stone wall. But the idea of that,
it was utilising all of the stonework that had been left over from the restoration of the reservoir
and create something for nature. So it should hopefully outlast all of us. So that was quite
good. During the project, I realised there's potential in the woodlands as well.
That was something that I think the focus had been on the visitor attraction building, the site,
surrounding reservoirs and land, but also attached to the site are some ancient woodlands
and some recreation woodlands. And fortunately, at the time that the First Minister wanted to
create a national woodland, a forest for whales. And we were successful in getting one of the first
grants. And again, working with the Friends of group, we created nature trails, story trails.
We took out invasive species, we reclaimed ponds and all of that delivered all of that, really.
So what does it mean to you to see the place as it is today?
I'm proud. I'm proud that when you speak to people and people say,
did you work on that reservoir? And I was like, yeah, I've been there. It's amazing. It's lovely.
The staff are great. It makes you feel like you've been a small part of a really big piece of history.
I think at the time, it felt a little bit like, oh my God, are we ever going to achieve this,
especially with COVID and the amount of work that needed to be done and how eager the community was
to get on site. And actually, the expectations of the community as well. It's a really important
site for people. I first knew about the site when probably when they drained the reservoir
and around that time, the campaign time, my husband and my in-laws live around the area. My
father-in-law has got an allotment next door. And I remember the expletives coming out of my husband's
mouse when the reservoir was drained, driving around the area, and I remember the people who
worked around the area. I knew about the site, but I grew up in Penaath, so it wasn't something that
formed part of my childhood or growing up in Cardiff. I've had people who have worked around
the area, worked at Cardiff Met on Kingcoy campus and came to me, so where are these reservoirs?
Where are they? And I say, you've probably driven past them most days of your working life. You
just don't see them. But I remember the first time coming onto the site, and it's so hidden,
it doesn't feel like you're in the middle of Cardiff. And I had that site to myself, which was
amazing. But it's really nice now that that's being able to be shared by lots of other people.
And hopefully, even though my kids roll their eyes and get bored of it, that maybe one day
when they're older, they'll be able to bring their kids here and say,
your grandmother did a bit of this. So yeah, be nice. It's nice.
Yes.
Ami, thank you very much for sharing your stories with us.